SHORT GAME PERFORMANCE NOTES

IT STARTS WITH A PLAN 
If you are looking to improve your short game, these performance notes will guide you. The correct path is obscure and full of obstacles, and like Robert Frost's poem, it is the road less taken. It doesn't require an extraordinary amount of time to improve, but it does take a willingness to focus on the intent of your training and the discipline to do the right things, the right way, each time out. A "secret" technique does not exist, and those that are constantly looking for that short cut at some point end up lost, frustrated, and racked with anxiety. That's not what we do here.
If you want to reach your goals and play up to your athletic potential, then you must make the conscious decision to formulate a plan and follow it. The plan will require you to master a few simple key elements and see growth in performance as the evitable result of the process.
There are three avenues we will explore:
i.	Improved technique - so that the ball is struck solidly, with consistency and control.
ii.	Efficient and effective practice-so the time you invest bears fruit. The proper training will allow you to confirm the execution of your fundamentals and grow your skills daily.
iii.	Mental prowess -so that you are empowered to play with a high level of focus, confidence, and resiliency.

The path less traveled is an improvement plan that encompasses all three avenues for every part of your short game: putting, finesse wedges, green side bunker, and distance wedges (two other avenues; your physical health and equipment may also be explored when pertinent to do so).

PUTTING
The first step is to realize that putting performance is a function of skill, not technique. If you look at all the great putters throughout history such as: George Low, Billy Casper, Jack Nicklaus, or Brad Faxon you would see very little in common from a technical standpoint, but all performers "owned"what they did, could repeat it, and shared in the ability to:
1. Start the ball on their intended line
2. Read the green to predict the correct line
3. Roll the ball at the right speed, and
4. Believe that most any putt addressed, was destined to find the bottom of the cup

These are the four essential skills in putting. It doesn't matter how you do them as long as you can. Faults with your current technique may be holding you back in some regard, but always remember that technique is a means to an end (improved skill) and not the end itself.
If you view putting in its entirety it can be difficult to sort through and discern what is required to improve, but if you break it down to its four essential skills and the technical nuances that affect each one, then the focus of the lens narrows to a few manageable fundamentals that are easily defined and understood.
The first step is to assess your current ability at each of the four skills. Start by performing the 20 Ball Dime, Star Drill with Coin, and Two Hole Knockout Assessments shown to you in this school. Your practice plan should be tailored to the results of those assessments. If you fail any of them, revisit the foundational techniques that may allow you develop proficiency in that area.

SKILL 1. Starting the Ball on Line 
Key variables: 
	Path of the putter during the stroke 
	Face angle of the putter at impact (controls up to 87% of ball's direction)
	Impact point of the ball on the putter 
	Aim of club at address 

SKILL 2. Touch
Key variables: 
	Consistent contact 
	Optimal ball launch and roll 
	Rhythm 
	Judgement regarding the elements effecting the balls roll to the hole-slope, wind, distance, grain, and green speed.
SKILL 3. Green Reading 
Key variables: 
	Having an organized process 
	Vision (Saccades) 
	Distance Control 
	Understanding the science of why balls behave like they do when rolling on the green 
	Embracing the Art 

SKILL 4. Belief 
Key variables: 
	Self-Image 
	Mental management 
	Focus 
	Mindset

YOUR STROKE 
The simplest and most repeatable stroke is that of a pure pendulum. A pendulum has a fixed fulcrum -F，an arm-L（arms and putter），a bob -B（putter head）and a displacement -X（backswing length）which ultimately defines the period of the swing（time）and height of arc -H 
If the stroke is executed properly，the putter will swing symmetrically moving either along the shaft plane or aim line with the face square to the direction it's moving（*depends on set up posture，putter design，and placement of the fulcrum relative to your hands）.My hope would be to have the putter face square to the target for several inches both before and after impact，which will mitigate the importance of ball position. As the swing lengthens，its path must begin to swing inside the aim line and the face must open and close slightly. This should happen naturally since the ball joints in your shoulders are not friction free bearings，but have muscles and tendons restricting their movement. Putters who resist this natural movement tend to “over control” their putters.

*The importance is not which picture of stroke shape you believe in，but rather that you understand and believe in one and have a way to cultivate that stroke. In addition，performance always trumps method.
A great set up and proper pendulum swing should allow you to roll your ball on your start line with consistency and control. Mastering four set up fundamentals and three in-swing fundamentals will allow you to sustain a high level of performance.
Set Up Foundations：
In order to make the optimal pendulum putting stroke you must set up so：
1）Your hands hang directly under the shoulders，and
2）The imaginary line between the ball joints of your shoulders run parallel to your intended aim line.
You will be able "see the line" and aim your putter more accurately if：
3）The ball lies directly under or just outside your eyes（Down the Line View）
and your dominant eye falls two inches behind the ball（Face-On View）.
（Right eye dominant right-handed players may need to set their lower body open in order to see the line and aim most effectively）.
Your ball will bounce less and tend to roll most efficiently if：
4）The ball is consistently positioned so that the putter strikes the ball at the bottom of the swing arc with approximately four degrees of effective loft on the putter.

LPGA Tour Player
Consider creating a "benchmark" measurement for ball position in both dimensions and check it regularly (Set up Checks). In addition, the ball shouldimpact the putter in its exact center of percussion, neither too high on the face nor too low, neither on the toe of the putter or on the heel. Use face tape, a video camera or the tee drill regularly to monitor your contact point.
Even though I strive to get all of my students to set up to the ball with thesefour concepts in mind; there is plenty of room for individuality. Even with great putters, I have never seen two strokesthat look exactly the same. Grip, feet alignment, posture, balance and even thecharacteristics of the putter to be used should be sorted through individually.
In-swing Foundations:
1) Maintaining Suspension Point (fixed fulcrum) - Mechanical breakdowns that create movement errors in the suspension point often include excess shoulder rotation relative to the aim line, wrist angle or elbow angle breakdowns, excess forearm rotation, or hip, knee, andhead movement. All of which can dramatically affect your ability to start the ball on line. These errors may also contribute to inconsistent contact making distance control difficult. Regularly practice the suspension point drills demonstrated in this school or use TPM training aid to create awareness.
2) Rhythm - A pendulum is rhythmic by definition. Every living object has a rhythm or frequency at which they are most comfortable and proficient, which is called "resonance". To have great touch on the greens you must own and be able to reproduce your resonant rhythm as well as effectively judge all the variables that influence a balls roll to the hole so that you can impart the correct energy to it.
3) Stability - During a great putting motion, stability is created in two very different ways. In your body as you hip hinge and set your core muscles to align your pelvis to your spine (posture) and in your eyes as you settle them softly on your Quiet Eye Spot. Body stability allows you to effectively disassociate the movement between your upper and lower body and eliminates unnecessary motion that can negatively affect your suspension point and therefore the stroke shape and your ability to start the ball on line.

To master it, regularly perform the Towel Stability Drill shown to you in this school. Quiet Eye Technique quiets your brain wave activity effectively calming your spirit and allowing you to move your putter with fluid motion. For more information on Quiet Eye Technique, read through the findings of Dr. Joan Vickers -University of Calgary and Dr. Debbie Crews Arizona State University).
Consistently confirm your pre-swing and in-
swing fundamentals by doing a small amount of Block Practice with feedback (Alignment Stick, Dime, Putting Tutor, Eye Line Mirror, Gate Trainer, or TPM). Proving to yourself daily that you can return the face to square and start the ball on line will do wonders for your mindset and resiliency as you face obstacles during play. Be specific and efficient and once confirmation is given, advance on to another part of your skill development training.
Doing "more" block practice is not "learning more", it's insecurity.
Transition to random and variable trials as soon as possible and practice processing while running your mental program. Great players love to compete. Tap into your competitive spirit and win the games I have designed for you (Star, N-S-E-W, 5 Ball 25, Short-Medium-Long, Knockout, 21, etc.).
FINDING AND DEVELOPING YOUR RESONENT RHYTHM In a pure pendulum stroke, the ball is not "hit" but rather the putter is swung and the ball is simply in the way. "Hit" connotes "muscular effort at" or "leading into" impact in order to propel the ball. In order to have great rhythm and touch, we must eliminate this tendency. The best putters in the world "let their putters swing". There is a big mental and physical difference between the two and you must have enough self-awareness to be able to recognize each.
Resonance is the state in which objects (both living and mechanical) operate coherently or in the most efficient manner. When putting, this frequency is not only influenced by the length and weight of your putter, but by your whole being; your personality, who you are. We can define this natural state several ways, but the one I like best is "a comfortable rate that requires the least amount of muscular effort to swing your putter".
Making continuous periodic swings is the key to finding your natural resonance. Test by getting into your address position without a ball and swinging your putter without interruption so that the head mimics the bob of a pendulum. As you move it back and forth equal in both pace and length, be aware of your comfort level and the muscular effort it takes to move the club. If you slow your swing down to a crawl, you' ll notice the muscular effort needed to control the speed increases. Likewise, speed up the swing to a rapid pace, and the same will hold true. Now change the period or rhythm to something in between these extremes searching for maximum comfort and minimal muscular tension. After a little trial and error, you' ll settle into one pace that feels most natural. That is the resonant rhythm of your putting stroke. Now that you can find resonance, we need to master that rhythm which by now you know necessitates quantifying it as well as having a way to train to ingrain the feel and confirm its execution. The best way to do this is to use a metronome.
Rhythm is a function of time measured in beats per minute and almost all proficient players that I have coached have a putting rhythm that falls within the range of 70-85 bpm. Quantify your resonant rhythm to a beats per minute number through trial and error while monitoring comfort and muscular effort.
Tum your metronome on to 70 bpm and lay it on the floor. Settle into your address position and set your putter down next to it so that it marks the bottom of your swing. Get your putter moving continuously and time the swing so that the putter passes by the device on each audible beat. Make sure that the top of your follow through and top of your backswing are equal in distance. Change the setting to 85 bpm and repeat the process. Lastly, vary the bpm within the stated range to settle into your perfect pace. Note the bpm number in your notebook. Your resonant rhythm is now quantified. Mine is 78 bpm while PGA Tour player Charlie Wi's is 72 bpm.
You should be able to vary the length of your swing relative to the metronome laying on the ground and still swing on that beat comfortably. In fact, that exercise which I call the "Resonant Rhythm Drill"
should be a mainstay in the block practice portion of your training. This drill ensures that you will be swinging at the same rhythm next week, next month and five years from now, and that continuity along with the feedback it gives will allow you to become its master. Lastly, we are rhythmic creatures and the beat of the metronome will soak into your subconscious (a phenomenon known as entrainment) regulating your whole process so it becomes smooth, graceful, and unrushed.
The Resonant Rhythm Drill Set your metronome to your resonant rhythm and lay it on the ground. The device will mark your ball position, but set the putter down inside of it so that when you swing it will pass by without interference.
Once again the goal is to make continuous uninterrupted swings with the putter head passing the metronome on each audible beat. Start off with relatively small swings as if you needed appropriate energy for a five foot putt (normal green, flat putt). Once your rhythm is well established and you are swinging in syne with the beat, lengthen your stroke without stopping the motion so that it would have appropriate energy for a fifteen foot putt (you will notice the overall pace of your stroke speed up to keep pace with the beating metronome). After four or five repetitions at this length continue the process for a twenty five foot putt and forty foot putt. Finish the drill by returning your strokes pace and length to one that is appropriate for a five foot putt (shorter and slower). This whole process should take approximately twenty seconds. This is a great warm up to find your rhythm before you play and would be much more beneficial for you to do if you happen to be running late for your tee time than rushing out to the driving range and slamming a few drivers.
In the first phase of the learning process (approximately three weeks) you may high cognitive awareness of your rhythm which may diminish performance. In this phase, I strongly suggest incorporating the metronome into your block practice every day. Once your ability to swing in rhythm has been adequately developed, you must learn to clear your mind and putt subconsciously by reacting to the target (practice the 3 Ball Charlie Wi Drill or the Hammer /Nail Drill demonstrated in this school daily).
Those that perform at the highest level, "let it happen" even in the most stressful circumstances. A proven strategy for many players is to develop a physical ritual to a rhythmic cadence for every putt other than tap-

GREEN READING SKILL The key to developing your green reading skill is to have an organized and consistent process you use to determine break. Use the one shown you in this school or create your own-but have one and commit to it by writing it down.
This skill is buoyed by first understanding the physics of why balls behave on the green the way they do (science). Review the research of H.A. Templeton -Vector Putting or Mark Sweeney -Aimpoint.
Most importantly, develop the "art of green reading" by both using feedback in your block training (Perfect Putter, Tutor, Dot to Dot, Star with Dime) and by using your green reading process in thousands of random trials and well-designed games. Knowing your tendencies will help you manage them. Remember-skill develops slowly over time and you can't circumvent the process.
TRAINING PLAN 
It should be obvious that non-specific or unintelligent practice makes long-term putting improvement unlikely. Make a habit of going through the "half hour perfect practice putting session"I have given you as part of this school. It along with the initial evaluation of your stroke and other specifics given to you as part of your video review is your business plan for putting and your answer to the fundamental problems associated with learning to putt.

SAMPLE HALF HOUR PERFECT PRACTICE PUTTING SESSION 
Two minutes of stability and /or suspension point training with work on a towel, prayer drill, or TPM.
	Four minutes of Setup Checks with "Dime"or Putting Tutor, Aim Line or similar. Focus on both the pre-swing and in-swing foundational elements and get feedback on your Aim, Path, Face Angle, Impact Point and start line. Within four minutes try and succeed on or make 10 perfect putts. Add breaking putts if time allows to train your mind to see break perform in all environments.
	Six minutes of the Star Drill. Work on matching line and speed and as always run your complete process, including green reading and post shot processes.
	Ten minutes of the Short, Medium and Long Putting Touch Drill. Run your Full Mental Program and shoot a touch score.
	Eight minutes game playing -"Three in a Row", "Darts", "Big Foot", Knockout, N-W-E-W or "5 Ball 25', Drawback or whatever is fun and challenging. As always, run your Full Mental Program and win your way off the green.

NON-NEGOTIABLE PUTTING CONCLUSIONS 
If we are to become great putters then we must: 
I. Understand and commit to a method with regards to how the putter is to be swung and learn to repeat it (own and master it).
2. We must practice with intelligence and develop the four skills of putting. This may include the variables that influence each (commitment to the method coupled with intelligent practice will ensure continuity and long term sustainable performance).
3. We must immerse ourselves in both an effective pre-shot and post shot ritual that will allow us to focus our minds and relax our bodies. The ultimate prize of mental skill is belief.






Charlie Hoffman wins the PGA Tour's Duetche Bank Championship How does it look like he feels emotionally? What's his self-image as a player?

If you want to play like a champion, you must to walk, talk, think, and feel like one!
